welcome to another episode of falsehoods
of Fitness today we're going to be
talking about central nervous system
fatigue or commonly referred to as CNS
fatigue so this was made popular the
terms made popular boy I think in like
the late 80s Early 90s by Arthur Jones
and Arthur Jones is the founder Nautilus
and then it was kind of kept popular by
a bodybuilder named Mike mentor and so
what they were talking about was how
there's recovery of muscular tissue you
know I can train my biceps and how long
does the actual tissue take to recover
but then there's the neurology
associated with activating that muscle
and there is such a thing as the fatigue
of the central nervous system in respect
to when it wants to recruit as much
tissue as let's say before an exercise
session so because effort is a very
dependent but maximum effort the idea
was that there is a certain amount of
time the central nervous system doesn't
want to engage a certain amount of
muscle and it turns out that's true
but in 2016 a lot of research came out
that shows that actually cardiovascular
exercise has a longer window of time
that it takes to reactivate to the same
degree some of these tissues called
excitability and it turns out that it
wasn't what people thought it was at all
it wasn't days or weeks that it takes
it's really from a cardiovascular
perspective it's like 30 minutes so and
if you think logically that makes sense
like if somebody does heavy resistance
exercise let's say they do heavy squats
or even two more exhausting degree like
x3 squats then they couldn't activate
musculature if they had to run up a
flight of stairs or something like that
couldn't or maybe they would lose their
balance because they can't fire and have
musculature so we know in soreness and
inability to engage muscle are two very
different things
so do not confuse those two different so
when we look at this this and Tamas in
2015-2016 two different studies really
did a lot to determine that this
cardiovascular exercise was was more so
the acute changes and the inability to
to engage or the excitability of
musculature but probably more to the
point specifically when looking at
resistance training very single session
heavy strength training is what it was
described by Litella in 2016 it looks at
what it takes to go to central nervous
system fatigue and then how long it
takes to recover from so this is just
something I pulled out of the study and
you can see here's baseline and this is
after somebody exercises you can see the
excitability goes down so baseline is
like right where central nervous system
fatigue is so right after so right right
sorta after the exercise you get about a
10-minute window where you're not you're
not able to really engage as much
20-minute window you right back to
baseline 30 minutes you can activate and
just as much above or at least you're
above the baseline and then it shows an
individual right about 48 hours later
there's another exercise session and
they can engage to a much higher degree
so central nervous system fatigue is a
thing but it's not a thing that anybody
really needs to worry about because the
actual tissue muscle protein synthesis
is really the bigger issue and and we
have a very good understand
that now with muscle biopsy studies
which is why we know 36 hours is really
the window and after 36 hours you can
you could train again now with the extra
protocol we wait 48 hours and that's
that's about it now when it comes to
muscle damage which I'll do another
false of the fitness on muscle damage
and sort of like the idea that you
create micro tears and micro tears have
to do with growth that is not true
either Mike there's more micro tears in
musculature when you run a marathon
versus do a weight training session and
gauzy run marathons they're not grown
any muscle so it's got nothing to do
with it and that'll probably be the next
fall says the Fitness hope that was
helpful and you can find me or people
who can answer your questions on the X
bar user's group on Facebook over 10,000
users there who a lot of which can
answer some some great questions there's
also the X bar or Facebook page in the
dr. John Jake wish page on Facebook and
then on instagram i'm at dr jaq util is
h hope that helps see you soon